Farwell young lords --these warlike principles
Do not throw from you:
and you, my lords,farewell:
Share the advicebetwixt you;
if both gain, all
The gift doth stretchitself as 'tis received,
And is enough for both.
'Tis our hope, sir, afterwell enter'd soldiers,
to return and find yourgrace in health.
No, no, it cannot be; andyet my heart
Will not confess he owesthe malady
That doth my life besiege.
Farewell, young lords;
Whether I live or die,
be you the sons of worthyFrenchmen:
Health, at your bidding,serve your majesty!
Those girls of Italy, takeheed of them:
They say, our French lacklanguage to deny,
If they demand: beware ofbeing captives,
Before you serve.
Our hearts receive yourwarnings.
Farewell. Farwell,my lord.
O, my sweet lord, that youwill stay behind us!
'Tis not his fault,the spark.
O, 'tis brave wars!
Most admirable: I haveseen those wars.
I am commanded here, andkept a coil
with 'Too young' and 'thenext year'
and ''tis too early.'
An thy mind stand to't,boy, steal away bravely.
I shall stay here theforehorse to a smock,
Creaking my shoes on theplain masonry,
Till honour be bought upand no sword worn
But one to dance with! Byheaven, I'll steal away.
There's honour inthe theft.
Commit it, count.
I am your accessary; andso, farewell.
I grow to you, and ourparting
is a tortured body.
Farewell, captain.
Sweet Monsieur Parolles!
Noble heroes, my sword andyours are kin.
Good sparks and lustrous,a word, good metals:
you shall find inthe regiment
of the Spinii one CaptainSpurio,
with his cicatrice, anemblem of war,
here on his sinistercheek;
it was this very swordentrenched it:
say to him, I live;
and observe his reportsfor me.
We shall, noble captain.
Mars dote on you for hisnovices!
what will ye do?
Stay: the king.
But, my good lord 'tisthus;
Will you be cured of yourinfirmity?
No.
O, will you eat no grapes,my royal fox?
Yes, but you will my noblegrapes,
an if my royal fox couldreach them:
I have seen a medicine
that's able to breathelife into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and makeyou dance canary
With spritely fireand motion;
whose simple touch,
Is powerful to araise KingPepin,
Nay, to give greatCharlemain a pen in's hand,
And write to her alove-line.
What 'her' is this?
Why, Doctor She: my lord,there's one arrived,
If you will see her:
now, by my faith andhonour,
If seriously I may conveymy thoughts
In this my lightdeliverance,
I have spoke with onethat,
in her sex, her years,profession,
Wisdom and constancy, hathamazed me more
Than I dare blame myweakness: will you see her
For that is her demand,and know her business?
That done, laugh well atme.
Now, good Lafeu,
Bring in the admiration;
that we with thee mayspend our wonder too,
or take off thine by wonderinghow thou took'st it.
Nay, I'll fit you, and notbe all day neither.
Thus he his specialnothing ever prologues.
This is his majesty; sayyour mind to him:
A traitor you dolook like;
but such traitors hismajesty seldom fears:
I am Cressid's uncle, thatdare leave two together;
Fare you well.
Now, fair one, does yourbusiness follow us?
Ay, my good lord.
Gerard de Narbon was myfather;
In what he did profess,well found.
I knew him.
The rather will I spare mypraises towards him:
Knowing him is enough.
On's bed of death manyreceipts he gave me:
chiefly one.
Which, as the dearestissue of his practise,
And of his old experiencethe oily darling,
He bade me store up, as atriple eye,
Safer than mine own two,more dear; I have so;
And hearing your highmajesty is touch'd
With that malignant causewherein the honour
Of my dear father's giftstands chief in power,
I come to tender it and myappliance
With all bound humbleness.
We thank you, maiden;
But may not be socredulous of cure,
When our most learneddoctors leave us and
The congregated collegehave concluded
That labouring art cannever ransom nature
From her inaidible estate;
I say we must not so stainour judgment,
or corrupt our hope,
to prostitute our past-curemalady
To empirics, or todissever so
Our great self and ourcredit, to esteem
A senseless help when helppast sense we deem.
My duty then shall pay mefor my pains:
I will no more enforcemine office on you.
Humbly entreating fromyour royal thoughts
A modest one, to bear meback a again.
I cannot give thee less,to be call'd grateful:
Thou thought'st to helpme; and such thanks I give
As one near death to thosethat wish him live:
But what at full I know,thou know'st no part,
I knowing all my peril,thou no art.
What I can do can do nohurt to try,
Since you set up your rest'gainst remedy.
He that of greatest worksis finisher
Oft does them by theweakest minister:
So holy writ in babes hathjudgment shown,
When judges have beenbabes;
great floods have flown
From simple sources, andgreat seas have dried
When miracles have by thegreatest been denied.
Oft expectation fails andmost oft there
Where most it promises,and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest anddespair most fits.
I must not hear thee; farethee well, kind maid;
Thy pains not used must bythyself be paid:
Dear sir, to my endeavoursgive consent;
Of heaven, not me, make anexperiment.
I am not an impostor thatproclaim
Myself against the levelof mine aim;
But know I think and thinkI know most sure
My art is not past powernor you past cure.
Are thou so confident?
Within what space hopestthou my cure?
The great'st grace lendinggrace
Ere twice the horses ofthe sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher hisdiurnal ring,
Ere twice in murk andoccidental damp
Moist Hesperus hathquench'd his sleepy lamp,
Or four and twenty timesthe pilot's glass
Hath told the thievishminutes how they pass,
What is infirm from yoursound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free andsickness freely die.
Upon thy certainty andconfidence
What darest thou venture?
Tax of impudence,
A strumpet's boldness, adivulged shame
Traduced by odiousballads: my maiden's name
Sear'd otherwise; nay,worse--if worse--extended
With vilest torture let mylife be ended.
Methinks in thee someblessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound withinan organ weak:
And what impossibilitywould slay
In common sense, sensesaves another way.
Thy life is dear; for allthat life can rate
Worth name of life in theehath estimate,
Youth, beauty, wisdom,courage, all
That happiness and primecan happy call:
Thou this to hazard needsmust intimate
Skill infinite ormonstrous desperate.
Sweet practiser, thyphysic I will try,
That ministers thine owndeath if I die.
If I break time, or flinchin property
Of what I spoke, unpitiedlet me die,
And well deserved: nothelping, death's my fee;
But, if I help, what doyou promise me?
Make thy demand.
But will you make it even?
Ay, by my sceptre and myhopes of heaven.
Then shalt thou give mewith thy kingly hand
What husband in thy powerI will command:
Exempted be from me thearrogance
To choose from forth theroyal blood of France,
My low and humble name topropagate
With any branch or imageof thy state;
But such a one, thyvassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask,thee to bestow.
Here is my hand; thepremises observed,
Thy will by my performanceshall be served:
So make the choice of thyown time, for I,
Thy resolved patient, onthee still rely.
More should I questionthee, and more I must,
Though more to know couldnot be more to trust,
From whence thou camest,how tended on: but rest
Unquestion'd welcome andundoubted blest.
I shall now put you to theheight of your breeding.
I will show myself highlyfed and lowly taught:
I know my business is butto the court.
To the court! why, whatplace make you special,
when you put off that withsuch contempt?
But to the court!
Truly, madam, if God havelent a man any manners,
he may easily put it offat court:
he that cannot make a leg,put off's cap,
kiss his hand and saynothing,
has neither leg, hands,lip, nor cap;
and indeed such a fellow,to say precisely,
were not for the court;but for me,
I have an answer willserve all men.
Marry, that's a bountifulanswer that fits all questions.
From below your duke tobeneath your constable,
Ask me if I am a courtier:
it shall do you no harm tolearn.
To be young again, if wecould:
I will be a fool inquestion,
hoping to be the wiser byyour answer.
I pray you, sir, are you acourtier?
O Lord, sir! There's asimple putting off
More, more, a hundred ofthem.
I am a poor friend ofyours, that loves you.
O Lord, sir! Thick, thick,spare not me.
I think, sir, you can eatnone of this homely meat.
O Lord, sir! Nay, put meto't, I warrant you.
You were lately whipped,sir, as I think.
O Lord, sir! spare not me.
Do you cry, 'O Lord, sir!'at your whipping,
and 'spare not me?' Indeedyour 'Spare not me,!'
is very sequent to yourwhipping:
you would answer very wellto a whipping,
if you were but boundto't.
I ne'er had worse luck in mylife in my 'O Lord, sir!'
I see things may servelong, but not serve ever.
I play the noble housewifewith the time
To entertain't so merrilywith a fool.
O Lord, sir! why, there'tserves well again.
An end, sir; to yourbusiness.
Give Helen this, And urge herto a present answer back:
Commend me to my kinsmenand my son:
This is not much.
Not much commendation tothem.
Not much employment foryou: you understand me?
Most fruitfully:
I am there before my legs.
They say miracles arepast;
and we have ourphilosophical persons,
to make modern andfamiliar,
things supernatural andcauseless.
Hence is it that we maketrifles of terrors,
ensconcing ourselves intoseeming knowledge,
when we should submitourselves
to an unknown fear.
Why, 'tis the rarestargument of wonder
that hath shot out in ourlatter times.
And so 'tis.
To be relinquish'd of theartists,--
So I say.
Both of Galen andParacelsus.
Of all the learned andauthentic fellows,--
Right; so I say.
That gave him outincurable,--
Why, there 'tis; so say Itoo.
Not to be helped,--
Right; as 'twere, a manassured of a--
Uncertain life, and suredeath.
Just, you say well; sowould I have said.
I may truly say, it is anovelty to the world.
It is, indeed: if you willhave it in showing,
you shall read it in--whatdo you call there?
A showing of a heavenlyeffect in an earthly actor.
That's it; I would havesaid the very same.
Why, your dolphin is notlustier:
'fore me, I speak inrespect--
Nay, 'tis strange, 'tisvery strange,
that is the brief and thetedious of it;
and he's of a mostfacinerious spirit
that will not acknowledgeit to be the--
Very hand of heaven.
Ay, so I say.
In a most weak--
and debile minister, greatpower,
great transcendence:
which should, indeed,
give us a further use tobe made
than alone the recovery ofthe king, as to be--
generally thankful.
I would have said it; yousay well.
Here comes the king.
Lustig, as the Dutchmansays:
I'll like a maid thebetter,
whilst I have a tooth inmy head:
why, he's able to lead hera coranto.
Mort du vinaigre! is notthis Helen?
'Fore God, I think so.
Go, call before me all thelords in court.
♪ music ♪
Sit, my preserver, by thypatient's side;
And with this healthfulhand, whose banish'd sense
Thou hast repeal'd, asecond time receive
The confirmation of mypromised gift,
Which but attends thynaming.
Fair maid, send forththine eye:
this youthful parcel
Of noble bachelors standat my bestowing,
O'er whom both sovereignpower and father's voice
I have to use: thy frankelection make;
Thou hast power to choose,and they none to forsake.
To each of you one fairand virtuous mistress
Fall, when Love please!marry, to each, but one!
Peruse them well:
Not one of those but had anoble father.
Gentlemen, Heaven haththrough me
restored the king tohealth.
We understand it, andthank heaven for you.
I am a simple maid, andtherein wealthiest,
That I protest I simply ama maid.
Please it your majesty, Ihave done already:
The blushes in my cheeksthus whisper me,
'We blush that thoushouldst choose;
but, be refused,
Let the white death sit onthy cheek for ever;
We'll ne'er come thereagain.'
Make choice; and, see,
Who shuns thy love shunsall his love in me.
Now, Dian, from thy altardo I fly,
And to imperial Love, thatgod most high,
Do my sighs stream. Sir,will you hear my suit?
And grant it.
Thanks, sir; all the restis mute.
The honour, sir, thatflames in your fair eyes,
Before I speak, toothreateningly replies:
Love make your fortunestwenty times above
Her that so wishes and herhumble love!
No better, if you please.
My wish receive,
Which great Love grant!and so, I take my leave.
Be not afraid that I yourhand should take;
I'll never do you wrongfor your own sake:
Blessing upon your vows!and in your bed
Find fairer fortune, ifyou ever wed!
These boys are boysof ice,
they'll none have her:
sure, they are bastards tothe English;
the French ne'er got 'em.
You are too young, toohappy, and too good,
To make yourself a son outof my blood.
Fair one, I think not so.
There's one grape yet;
I am sure thy father drunkwine:
but if thou be'st not anass,
I am a youth of fourteen;
I have known thee already.
I dare not say I take you;but I give
Me and my service, everwhilst I live,
Into your guiding power.This is the man.
Why, then, young Bertram,take her; she's thy wife.
My wife, my liege! I shallbeseech your highness,
In such a business give meleave to use
The help of mine own eyes.
Know'st thou not, Bertram,what she has done for me?
Yes, my good lord;
but never hope to know whyI should marry her.
Thou know'st she hasraised me
from my sickly bed.
But follows it, my lord,to bring me down
Must answer for yourraising?
I know her well:
She had her breeding at myfather's charge.
A poor physician'sdaughter my wife!
Disdain rather corrupt meever!
'Tis only title thoudisdain'st in her,
the which I can build up.
Strange is it thatour bloods,
In colour, weight, andheat, pour'd all together,
Would quite confounddistinction,
yet stand off indifferences so mighty.
If she be all that isvirtuous,
save what thou dislikest,
A poor physician'sdaughter,
thou dislikest of virtuefor the name:
but do not so:
From lowest place whenvirtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified bythe doer's deed:
Where great additionsswell's, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honour.Good alone
Is good without a name.Vileness is so:
The property by what it isshould go,
Not by the title. She isyoung, wise, fair;
In these to nature she'simmediate heir,
And these breed honour:
the mere word's a slave
Debosh'd on every tomb, onevery grave
A lying trophy, and as oftis dumb
Where dust and damn'doblivion is the tomb
Of honour'd bones indeed.What should be said?
If thou canst like thiscreature as a maid,
I can create the rest:virtue and she
Is her own dower; honourand wealth from me.
I cannot love her, norwill strive to do't.
Thou wrong'st thyself, if thoushouldst strive to choose.
That you are well restored,my lord, I'm glad:
Let the rest go.
My honour's at the stake;
which to defeat, I mustproduce my power.
Here, take her hand,
Proud scornful boy,unworthy this good gift;
That dost in vilemisprision shackle up
My love and her desert;that canst not dream,
We, poising us in herdefective scale,
Shall weigh thee to thebeam; that wilt not know,
It is in us to plant thinehonour where
We please to have it grow.Cheque thy contempt:
Obey our will, whichtravails in thy good:
Believe not thy disdain,but presently
Do thine own fortunes thatobedient right
Which both thy duty owesand our power claims;
Or I will throw thee frommy care for ever
Into the staggers and thecareless lapse
Of youth and ignorance;both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee, in thename of justice,
Without all terms of pity.
Speak; thine answer.
Pardon, my gracious lord;for I submit
My fancy to your eyes:when I consider
What great creation andwhat dole of honour
Flies where you bid it, Ifind that she, which late
Was in my nobler thoughtsmost base, is now
The praised of the king;who, so ennobled,
Is as 'twere born so.
Take her by the hand,
And tell her she is thine:to whom I promise
A counterpoise, if not tothy estate
A balance more replete.
I take her hand.
Good fortune and thefavour of the king
Smile upon this contract;whose ceremony
Shall seem expedient onthe now-born brief,
And be perform'd to-night:the solemn feast
Shall more attend upon thecoming space,
Expecting absent friends.As thou lovest her,
Thy love's to mereligious; else, does err.
Your lord and masterdid well
to make his recantation.
Recantation! My lord! mymaster!
Ay; is it not a language Ispeak?
A most harsh one, and notto be understood
without bloody succeeding.My master!
Are you companion to theCount Rousillon?
To any count, to allcounts, to what is man.
To what is count's man:
count's master is ofanother style.
You are too old, sir;
let it satisfy you, youare too old.
I must tell thee, sirrah,I write man;
to which title age cannotbring thee.
What I dare too well do, Idare not do.
I did think thee, for twoordinaries,
to be a pretty wisefellow;
thou didst make tolerablevent of thy travel;
it might pass: yet thescarfs and the
bannerets about thee
did manifoldly dissuademe
from believing thee a vessel oftoo great a burthen.
I have now found thee;when I lose thee again,
I care not:
Hadst thou not the privilegeof antiquity upon thee,--
Do not plunge thyself toofar in anger,
lest thou hasten thytrial; which if
Lord have mercy on theefor a hen!
So, my good window oflattice, fare thee well:
thy casement I need notopen,
for I look through thee.
Give me thy hand.
My lord, you give me mostegregious indignity.
Ay, with all my heart; andthou art worthy of it.
I have not, my lord,deserved it.
Yes, good faith, everydram of it;
and I will not bate thee ascruple.
Well, I shall be wiser.
Even as soon as thoucanst,
If ever thou be'st boundin thy scarf and beaten,
thou shalt find what it is
to be proud of thybondage.
My lord, you do me mostinsupportable vexation.
I would it were hell-painsfor thy sake,
and my poor doing eternal:for doing I am past:
as I will by thee,
in what motion age will giveme leave.
Well, thou hast a son
shall take this disgraceoff me;
scurvy, old, filthy,scurvy lord!
Well, I must be patient;
there is no fettering ofauthority.
I'll beat him, by my life,
if I can meet him with anyconvenience,
an he were double anddouble a lord.
I'll have no more pity ofhis age than I would of--
I'll beat him, an if Icould but meet him again.
Sirrah, your lord andmaster's married;
there's news for you: youhave a new mistress.
I most unfeignedly beseechyour lordship
to make some reservationof your wrongs:
he is my good lord: whom Iserve above is my master.
Who? God?
Ay, sir.
The devil it is that's thymaster.
Why dost thou garter upthy arms o' this fashion?
dost make hose of sleeves?do other servants so?
Thou wert best set thylower part
where thy nose stands.
By mine honour, if I werebut two hours younger,
I'ld beat thee:
methinks, thou art ageneral offence,
and every man should beatthee:
I think thou wast createdfor men
to breathe themselvesupon thee.
This is hard and undeservedmeasure, my lord.
Go to, you are a vagabondand no true traveller:
you are more saucy with noblesand honourable personages
than the commission ofyour birth
and virtue gives youheraldry.
You are not worth anotherword,
else I'ld call you knave.
Undone, and forfeited tocares for ever!
What's the matter,sweet-heart?
Although before the solemnpriest I have sworn,
I will not bed her.
What, what, sweet-heart?
O my Parolles, they havemarried me!
I'll to the Tuscan wars,and never bed her.
France is a dog-hole, andit no more merits
The tread of a man's foot:to the wars!
There's letters from mymother:
what the import is, I knownot yet.
Ay, that would be known.
To the wars, my boy, tothe wars!
He wears his honour in abox unseen,
That hugs his kicky-wickyhere at home,
Spending his manly marrowin her arms,
Which should sustain thebound and high curvet
Of Mars's fiery steed. Toother regions
France is a stable; wethat dwell in't jades;
Therefore, to the war!
It shall be so: I'll sendher to my house,
Acquaint my mother with myhate to her,
And wherefore I am fled;write to the king
That which I durst notspeak; his present gift
Shall furnish me to thoseItalian fields,
Where noble fellowsstrike: war is no strife
To the dark house and thedetested wife.
Will this capriccio holdin thee? art sure?
I'll send her straightaway: to-morrow
I'll to the wars, she toher single sorrow.
Why, these balls bound;there's noise in it.
'Tis hard:
A young man married is aman that's marr'd:
My mother greets mekindly; is she well?
She is not well; but yetshe has her health:
she's very merry; but yetshe is not well:
but thanks be given,
she's very well andwants nothing
in the world; but yet sheis not well.
If she be very well, whatdoes she ail,
that she's not very well?
Truly, she's very wellindeed,
but for two things.
What two things?
One, that she's not inheaven,
whither God send herquickly!
the other that she'sin earth,
from whence God send herquickly!
Bless you, my fortunatelady!
I hope, sir, I have yourgood will
to have mine own goodfortunes.
You had my prayers to leadthem on;
and to keep them on, havethem still.
O, my knave, how does myold lady?
So that you had herwrinkles and I her money,
I would she did asyou say.
Why, I say nothing.
Marry, you are the wiserman;
for many a man's tongue shakesout his master's undoing:
to say nothing, to donothing, to know nothing,
and to have nothing,
is to be a great part ofyour title;
which is within a verylittle of nothing.
Away! thou'rt a knave.
You should have said, sir,before a knave
thou'rt a knave; that's,before me thou'rt a knave:
this had been truth, sir.
Go to, thou art a wittyfool; I have found thee.
Did you find me inyourself, sir?
or were you taught to findme?
The search, sir, wasprofitable;
and much fool may you findin you,
even to the world'spleasure
and the increaseof laughter.
A good knave, i' faith,and well fed.
Madam, my lord will goaway to-night;
A very serious businesscalls on him.
The great prerogative andrite of love,
Which, as your due, timeclaims,
he does acknowledge;
But puts it off to acompell'd restraint;
Whose want, and whosedelay,
is strew'd with sweets,
Which they distil now inthe curbed time,
To make the coming houro'erflow with joy
And pleasure drownthe brim.
What's his will else?
That you will take yourinstant leave o' the king
And make this haste asyour own good proceeding,
Strengthen'd with whatapology you think
May make it probable need.
What more commands he?
That, having thisobtain'd, you presently
Attend his furtherpleasure.
In every thing I wait uponhis will.
I shall report it so.
But I hope your lordshipthinks not him a soldier.
Yes, my lord, and of veryvaliant approof.
You have it from his owndeliverance.
And by other warrantedtestimony.
Then my dial goes nottrue:
I took this lark fora bunting.
I do assure you, my lord,
he is very great inknowledge
and accordingly valiant.
I have then sinned againsthis experience and
transgressed against hisvalour;
and my state that way isdangerous,
since I cannot yet find inmy heart to repent.
Here he comes: I pray you,make us friends;
I will pursue the amity.
Pray you, sir, who's histailor?
Sir?
O, I know him well, I,sir; he, sir,
he's a good workman, avery good tailor.
Is there any unkindness
between my lord and you,monsieur?
I know not how I havedeserved
to run into my lord'sdispleasure.
It may be you havemistaken him, my lord.
And shall do so ever,
though I took him at 'sprayers.
Believe this of me,
there can be no kernel inthis light nut;
the soul of this man ishis clothes.
Trust him not in matter ofheavy consequence;
Farewell, monsieur:
I have spoken better ofyou
than you have or will todeserve at my hand;
but we must do goodagainst evil.
An idle lord. I swear.
I think not so.
Why, do you not know him?
Yes, I do know him well,
and common speech giveshim a worthy pass.
Is she gone to the king?
She is.
Will she away tonight?
As you will have her.
I have writ my letters,casketed my treasure,
Given order for ourhorses; and to-night,
When I should takepossession of the bride,
End ere I do begin.
Here comes my clog.
I have, sir, as I wascommanded from you,
Spoke with the king andhave procured his leave
For present parting;
only he desires someprivate speech with you.
I shall obey his will.
You must not marvel,Helen, at my course,
Which holds not colourwith the time, nor does
The ministration andrequired office
On my particular. PreparedI was not
For such a business;therefore am I found
So much unsettled: thisdrives me to entreat you
That presently you takeour way for home;
And rather muse than askwhy I entreat you,
For my respects are betterthan they seem
And my appointments havein them a need
Greater than shows itselfat the first view
To you that know them not.
This to my mother:
'Twill be two days ere Ishall see you, so
I leave you to yourwisdom.
Sir, I can nothing say,
But that I am your mostobedient servant.
Come, come, no more ofthat.
And ever shall
With true observance seekto eke out that
Wherein toward me myhomely stars have fail'd
To equal my great fortune.
Let that go:
My haste is very great:farewell; hie home.
Pray, sir, your pardon.
Well, what would you say?
I am not worthy of thewealth I owe,
Nor dare I say 'tis mine,and yet it is;
But, like a timorousthief,
most fain would steal
What law does vouchmine own.
What would you have?
Something; and scarce somuch: nothing, indeed.
I would not tell you whatI would, my lord:
Faith yes;
Strangers and foes dosunder, and not kiss.
I pray you, stay not, butin haste to horse.
I shall not break yourbidding, good my lord.
Go thou toward home; whereI will never come
Whilst I can shake mysword or hear the drum.
Great Mars, I put myselfinto thy file
Make me but like mythoughts
and I shall prove a loverof thy drum,
hater of love